hey everyone my name is Jimmy I'm a
former LinkedIn software engineer who
spent the last three years helping
others prepare for the coding interview
in this video we're going to break down
the post-order traversal which is really
the most important Technique we need to
know when we're solving binary tree
questions using recursion so we're going
to start by looking at a classic
interview question that's going to teach
us the motivation for the technique then
we're going to look at how it can be
applied to three additional questions
including a hard question that is
frequently asked by all of the top tech
companies so if you like this material
please don't forget to like comment and
subscribe and don't forget to check out
the link in the description below for a
free interactive visual guide to all of
the most important coding interview
patterns so the first question we're
going to look at is diameter of a binary
tree we're first going to look at the
Brute Force approach to the problem
that's going to help us understand why
the post-order traversal approach is
necessary this is a pretty well-known
interview question so if you are already
familiar with it feel free to skip ahead
to the 10 minute 30 Mark where we talk
about how the postorder approach can be
used to solve problems in general in
this question we are being asked to find
the diameter of a binary tree where the
diameter is defined as the longest path
between any two nodes in the tree if we
have this tree on the left then the
diameter is going to be this path right
here between nodes 5 and three and
specifically we want the number of edges
on this path which is going to be 1 2
three four five in this case the
diameter of a tree does not have to go
through the root for example in this
tree right here the diameter is this
path and it has a total of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
edges so let's say we have this binary
tree right here the diameter is this
path between nodes four and three for a
length of 1 2 3 4 5 the first thing we
want to note is that the diameter of a
binary tree is always going to exist
between two Leaf nodes in the binary
tree so our algorithm is going to look
like this we're going to visit every
single node in our binary tree and at
each node we're going to calculate the
length of the longest Leaf to Leaf path
that runs through that node and after we
finish visiting each node we can return
the longest of those paths that we found
so there are two ways to execute this
algorithm the first is from the top down
what this means is we're going to start
by finding the longest path that runs
through the root node now how do we do
this well the longest path that runs
through the root is just going to be
equal to the height of the root node's
left sub tree so this has 1 2 3 4 for
height of four plus the height of the
node's right sub tree which is one so
once we have those two values we can add
them two together to get the length of
the longest path that runs through there
which is going to be five so after we
finish getting the length of the longest
path running through the root node we're
going to move on to the next node in the
tree and do the same calculation here
we're just going to follow that same
process find the height of the left sub
tree this is going to be one then we're
going to find the height of the right
sub tree which is three in this
case we can add those two numbers to get
four so we're going to do that same
process for every single node in the
binary tree and you might be able to
tell that there's a lot of repeat work
being done in particular at each node we
have to Traverse all the nodes below it
to find the height of the left the left
and write sub trees now all that repeat
work leads to a big O of n s runtime
which is not going to be good enough for
the coding interview so here's the code
for this top down approach we have this
function diameter right here which takes
in a node and the first thing this
function does is it gets the height of
nodes left and right subt trees using
this recursive function here after those
values are returned it then calculates
the longest path through the root of
this sub Tree by adding left height and
right height together and after that it
moves on to finding the longest path
that runs through the no's left sub tree
and so this is where that repeat work is
coming from every time we recurse one
node further down to get its longest
path we have to find the height of that
node's left and right subt trees so you
can kind of think of this as a nested
for Loop of sorts and again this is this
has the bigo of n^2 runtime so now let's
look at the bottom up approach to this
problem instead of starting at our root
node we're instead going to want to
think about starting at the bottommost
node in our tree which is this node
right here and when we're at this node
we want to do the same thing we did
before we want to calculate the length
of the longest path that runs through
this node using the heights of its left
and right sub trees so this node has
empty left and right sub trees so
they're both going to have height zero
and now node three can take those two
values add them together to get the
length of the longest path which is zero
so let's just write that value down here
in a VAR called Max we'll talk about
this variable a little bit more when we
look at the implementation of this
bottomup approach in a second but for
now let's keep on going on with the
process so after node 3 is done finding
its longest path it's going to return
its height to its parent node and that
height is one and after it returns that
height we're done with it we don't ever
need to visit this node again and now
node one has part of what it needs to
calculate its own longest path it also
needs the height of its right sub tree
So eventually this node will pass in its
height right here this is going to be
one we're done with this node now node
one has the height of both its left and
right sub trees so it's going to add
them two together and to get two which
is just this path right here okay so now
the max path that we found so far is two
so we're going to update that and this
is just saying thus far after all of the
nodes that we visited which are the
nodes in this subtree we have found a
maximum path of length two so now node
one is done calculating its longest path
it's going to return its height back up
to its parent which is going to be two
we're done with these entire nodes this
is going to return a one so now we're
going to add these two together 2 + 1
which is three update our Max now we're
going to return our height to our parent
so this is going to return a three we're
done with these nodes this returns a one
okay and then we're going to take those
two these two numbers add them together
which is four
and since we're at our root we visited
every single node and we can return that
our diameter is four so this bottom up
approach is the optimal solution to this
question because we visit each node in
our binary tree Once the runtime for
this algorithm is going to be Big O of n
where n is the number of nodes in our
binary tree so here's the code for
optimal solution we'll see that we have
a single recursive function that Returns
the height of the sub tree rooted at a
given node it also calculates the length
of the longest path that runs through
that node using the values of the
heights of its left and right sub trees
you can see that's being done right here
and you notice that this calculation of
left plus right is done after the
recursive calls and that fact right
there the fact that it's being done
after the recursive calls is also known
as a post-order traversal and it's what
gives our algorithm bottom up behavior
that we just saw so we're also using
this Global variable Max right here to
store the length of the longest path in
our binary tree the reason why we want
to use this Global variable is because
our recursive function Returns the
height of each sub tree and that's
different than the value that our
question is asking for and so by using a
global variable to store the longest
path that we've seen so far we're able
to keep this return statement simple and
in my opinion that just makes it easier
to tell what the recursive function is
doing and you can see that we don't
return the result of the recursive
function at the end we just return the
value stored in Max after the recursive
function has finished executing so now
let's visualize a few steps of this
algorithm so we can just get a complete
understanding of how everything works so
the first step is to initialize that
Global variable Max now we're going to
start our recursive function at the root
of this binary tree now this recursive
function is trying to calculate both the
longest path that runs through the root
node and the height of its sub tree to
do that it needs to know the height of
its left sub tree so we're going to
recurse left sub tree
recurse so now we've reached our first
base case where node is none so we're
going to return zero to its parent so
now node one has the height of its left
sub tree it's going to get the height of
its right sub tree which is zero so now
at this point node one has received the
height of both its left and right sub
trees so now it can calculate the length
of the longest path path that runs
through it using those two values so
it's going to do left plus right which
is still zero so max is still zero we
haven't found a longer path than zero
yet during our traversal and now we're
going to return the height of our sub
tree back up to our parent okay so now
at this point our parent has the height
of its left sub tree it's going to move
on to finding the height of its right
sub tree which is going to go through a
few base cases like we just
saw okay right here this is a base case
so now like before Noe four has the
height of its left and right sub trees
add some together now it's going to
return one to its parent so now node 9
has the height of its left and right sub
trees it's going to add them two
together to get two and it's going to
update the variable Max right here so
max is updated this just means we found
a path of length to so far in this
subtree which is all the nodes that we
visited so far and now we're going to
return our height to our parent which is
Max left plus right plus 1 which is two
okay so this just continues until we
visited every single node in the binary
tree let's just go over the complexities
one more time the time complexity of
this algorithm is going to be Big O of n
because we only visit every single node
once and the space complexity is going
to be o of H and this is just due to the
nature of depth for search which means
we'll have as many of these call frames
on the call stack as there are nodes in
the height of our binary tree now let's
summarize what we just covered there are
are two approaches to the binary tree
problem the first is the top down
approach which has Big O of N squ Run
time which is not good enough for the
coding interview the other approach is
from the bottom up here we think about
first calculating the longest path that
runs through the leaf nodes of the tree
the leaf nodes then return their heights
up to the parent which then use those
values to calculate its longest path and
we work our way up the tree only
visiting each node once and that results
in the optimal bigo of n run time
now this bottom up approach is also
known as a post-order traversal and
that's going to be the focus of this
video from here on out so when do we
need to use this postorder traversal so
whenever we need to calculate something
at each node in a binary tree using
values from that node's left and right
sub tree we're going to need to use this
post-order traversal in order for us to
get the optimal solution so in our
diameter example at each node we needed
the heights of the left and right
subtree in order to calculate the length
of the longest path that runs through
each node and if you notice in the code
we're calculating the length of the
longest path through each node after the
recursive calls to its left and right
subt trees have finished and that's what
gives the postorder traversal its name
we're processing the current node after
its left and right subt trees let's now
look at another example of a question
that uses this post-order traversal so
in this question we're being asked to
find the tilt of a binary tree this
question is rated as an easy only code
so it might be something you see in the
earlier rounds of your interview like
doing a phone screen for example but
regardless it's a great question for us
to start plying the concepts we just
learned about the post-order traversal
so here we're given a binary tree and
we're asked to find its tilt now the
Tilt is something that can be calculated
at each node and it's defined as the
difference between each node's left sub
tree and right sub tree sum so in this
case the Tilt here at this node is going
to be 9 - 2 we want to take the absolute
value of that so at this node it's going
to be seven and these have empty left
and right sub trees so these are going
to be zero and zero okay and the Tilt
applies to every node in a binary tree
so in this case this is one this is four
so the Tilt at this node is going to be
three uh the Tilt at this node is going
to be 7 - 3 which is 4 and then in order
to calculate the Tilt at the root node
we have to sum everything up here so
this is going to be 14 this is going to
be 12 okay so 14 - 12 is 2 so we want to
sum up all of these numbers together so
3 + 4 + 2 so the tilt of this entire
binary tree is going to be nine first
thing what makes this a good question
for using that postorder or bottomup
approach it's because at each node we
need to calculate something based on the
values of our left and right sub trees
in particular we need to know the sum of
our left and right sub trees in order to
calculate the Tilt at that node and now
when we actually work through how to
solve this problem remember to work from
the bottom up so we're going to
calculate the Tilt at this node first
well it's left and right sub trees have
sums of 0er so 0- 0 is 0 so at this note
the Tilt is zero and we can store that
in this variable here now when that's
done what do we need to return to its
parent to our parent so it can calculate
its tilt well we need to return the sum
of this entire sub tree so this is going
to return a one same thing okay now
we're going to move to 4 0 Z here tilt
hasn't changed this needs to return the
sum of its sub tree to its parent which
is going to be four now when node 9 has
those two values it's going to subtract
them in order to find the Tilt at node 9
okay so 4 - 1 is three we're going to
update this value right here now what do
we need to return to its parent we need
to return the sum of this entire subtree
so that's going to be 1 + 4 + 9 which is
14 and that's going to continue in depth
for search fashion until we visited
every single node and we can have the
Tilt for the entire tree and again this
bottom up approach is going to let us do
this in Big O of end time because we
only have to visit each node in our
binary tree Once so I'm going to leave
the implementation up to you I left a
link to this question on hello
interview.com where you can practice it
it's going to look a lot like the
solution to diameter of a binary tree
but work it out for yourself cuz it's
again it's just a really good question
to get more comfortable with this
postorder traversal so now on to to
question number two so in this question
we are being asked to find the longest
univ Valley path in a binary tree and
that is just a path where all of the
nodes along that path have the same
value so in this case this is one uni
value path between nodes two and two but
this is going to be the longest univ
valy path right here because all nodes
along this path have the same value
three and what we really want is the
number of edges along that path so this
is going to return three in this case
and just like the diameter of a binary
tree question this longest path does not
have to pass through the root of our
binary tree so our approach to this
problem is going to be very similar to
the one that we Ed to find the diameter
of a binary tree so let's quickly
revisit that solution so we can
understand what each value that each
node gets from its left and right subt
trees and how that contributes to
finding the longest path so in the
diameter question each node returned the
height of its sub tree to its parent so
this node is going to return A2 to its
parent while this node returns A1 and
let's really understand what this value
two represents here so from node 3's
perspective this value two represents
the longest path from its left sub tree
that node three can extend as part of
the longest path that runs through node
3 and how does it extend that path it
extends it by combining the longest path
from the right subtree okay so if this
two just indicates this path right here
and when we we calculate the longest
path that's going through node 3 we want
to extend that by combining it with this
path and that gives us the longest path
that's running through node 3 so we can
visualize it as basically gluing the
longest paths from the left and right
subt trees together in order to get the
longest path that goes through no so
understanding each return value as the
longest path that can be extended by its
parent is really the key to solving
these longest path binary tree problems
so so now let's look at how we can apply
that same principle to this question of
finding the longest uni valy path so our
algorithm is going to work by visiting
each node in our binary tree and at each
node we're going to calculate the
longest univ Valley path that runs
through that node there are no univ valy
paths that run through any of the leaf
nodes so at this node it's going to be
this path and this node it's going to be
this path and at the root it's actually
this path right here and we want to take
the longest of those paths for this path
one 2 3 so let's visually understand how
we're going to find each of those paths
using the bottomup traversal and we're
going to really focus on the return
values that each sub tree returns to its
parent which represents the longest path
that can possibly be extended by its
parent okay so let's look at our node
here because we're going to start at the
bottom of the tree the longest path that
can be extended by its parent actually
has a length of zero and we'll find out
exactly why in a second same with this
node this is going to return a z so now
now we're at node two we want to
calculate the longest uni Valley path
that runs through it using these two
return values right here so the first
thing we have to check is if we have to
check if our node is equal to our left
child because when that's true we're
basically allowed to include this Edge
right here as part of the longest Union
Valley path and we're able to extend it
using whatever value we got from our
left child so in this case that's a zero
so same logic applies to our right child
they have the same value we can think
about extending this Edge right here so
for we one and so now the longest univ
value path that goes through this node
is going to be 1 + 0 + 1 + 0 which is
going to be two so we're just going to
store that value in this variable Max
right here so now we're done with node
two and we want to return a value up to
our parent and we want to return the
longest uni Val path that can possibly
be extended by our parent okay we can't
return this two here because
uh our parent can't do anything with
this path it only has to it can only
exist from one side okay so the longest
univ Val path that exists on one side is
actually either of these could be this
one or this one okay so it has a length
of one so node 3 is a leaf node so it's
also going to return a zero so now node
3 has received both of these values from
its left and right sub trees and it
needs to use them to calculate the
length of the longest univ Val valy path
that goes through it okay so first thing
we have to check 3 is not equal to two
so we actually can't use this value one
at all it's not relevant because we
can't include this Edge as part of
extending our longest unit Valley path
in this case 3 is equal to three so we
can draw a one here now we're going to
add that to our return value the fact
that they're equal lets us use this
return value so we're going to have a 1+
0 that just means the longest Union
Valley path that goes go through this
node has length one it's not greater
than our Max so we don't have to do
anything now we have to return a value
up to our parent we need to return the
longest uh univ Valley path that can be
extended to our parent okay and that's
really just this path right here so
we're going to return a one now this is
a leaf node this is going to return a
zero okay so our root node has to do the
same thing has to use the same Val use
these two values to calculate the
longest Union Valley path that runs
through it which is really just this
path okay so first thing we have to
check three and three are equal to each
other so we can think about drawing a
one here this allows us to use our
return value same thing here three and
three are equal you can draw one here
this allows us to use our return value
so we're going to have 1 + 1+ 1 + 0 now
our Max uni value path that we found so
far has length three and now if we were
to return a value to our parent let's
say there are more nodes up here if we
were then we would return two to
indicate this path right here because
again it can only be from one side so
this would return A2 but since we are
actually done visiting each node in our
binary tree we can just return the value
of Max okay so this is the approach to
longest Union Valley path so really
think about each node returning the
length of the longest Union Valley path
up to its parent that its parent can
possibly extend the logic for this
question is definitely tricky definitely
requires you to think about it in terms
of how to implement it so I'm going to
leave that to you there's a link to the
description in hello interview.com as
well where we can try it out so the last
question we're going to look at is
binary tree maximum path sum and this
question is rated as a hard on leak code
and it's asked by all of the top te
companies such as meta Google Amazon
Apple Etc okay and even though it's
rated as hard it becomes a lot more
manageable once we break it down in
terms of what we already know about the
bottom up or postorder traversal and the
way we learn to think about these
longest path in a binary tree problem so
this question is asking for the path in
the binary tree with the maximum sum so
in this case it's going to be this path
right here between these two nodes for a
sum of 3 + 2 + 1 + 3 for a total of nine
and one thing to note is that this path
can pass through any node in the binary
tree but it must contain at least one
node so we want to solve this in a very
similar fashion to both the diameter and
the longest Union Valley path questions
that we already saw we want to solve
this from the bottom up and we want each
node to return the maximum value path
that can be extended by its parent okay
so we're going to start at this node in
the binary tree and since we know that
our path has to contain at least one
node then we can write this down the
value of this node as the maximum path
that we've seen so far and now what we
want to do is we want to return the
value of the maximum path that can be
extended by its parent so this is going
to return A3 this node is going to
return A2 now when we're at node two
we're first going to calculate the
longest path that goes through node two
so that's going to be 3 + 2 + 2 for a
total of seven so 7 is the longest path
that we've seen so far and now we want
to return the maximum value path that
can be extended by our parent okay so
that's actually going to be this path
right here so that value is going to be
the largest between 3 + 2 and 2+ 2 so
that's going to be five okay and if we
just visualize this this allows node one
the root node to use this path as part
of its maximum path sum that goes
through it okay so now this one's going
to return a three now node one has
enough information to calculate the
maximum path that runs through it which
is 5 + 3 + 1 okay which is going to be 9
and if we did have another value to
return up we would return 3 + 5 + 1 as
the maximum path that could be extended
to its parent but we don't here so we
can just return this nine at the very
end so this is the gist of our approach
the only other thing we need to talk
about is how to handle negative values
to figure that out I recommend playing
around with a few small binary trees
with negative values such as this one or
this one just really think about what
value each subtree needs to send to its
parent so that its parent is able to
accurately calculate its maximum path
that runs through that node and that's
and again I'm going to leave that up to
you it's a great way to practice your
problem solving skills and get practice
implementing this question using the
bottom up and post order approach that
we just talked about it's going to be it
for this video and I know we've covered
a lot so let's quickly summarize all of
the important takeaways first one is
that we want to use this post-order
traversal whenever we have a question
that requires us to calculate something
at each node based on values that we
need from our left and right subtrees
and in the code for post odal traversal
Solutions we're going to first make
those recursive calls then after getting
those values we're going to use those
values to calculate something for our
current node then finally after that
we're going to return some value to our
parent and this just allows us to work
from the bottom of the tree upwards and
solve everything in one traversal which
results in the optimal Big O of and time
complexity and longest path questions
are a specific type of question that can
be solved using the post-order traversal
for these types of questions you want to
think about having each subtree return
the longest path that can be extended by
its parent the parent's going to have to
work out some logic to see how it uses
those values to calculate the length of
the longest path that runs through its
node and then Returns the longest path
that can be extended to its parent okay
so definitely work through the practice
problems that we talked about here in
order to really solidify your
understanding of how to use that
approach and I've also left a couple of
more questions that use this post order
traversal in the description we just
didn't have time to cover it in today's
video okay so that's going to be it I
hope this helps you all good luck in
your interviews don't forget to like
comment and subscribe and don't don't
forget to head over to hello
interview.com if you want more of these
types of breakdowns to the most
important coding interview patterns all
right bye everyone